.. doctest-skip-all

*****************************
What's New in Photutils 1.13?
*****************************

Here we highlight some of the new functionality of the 1.13 release.
In addition to these changes, Photutils 1.13 includes a large number
of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the full
:ref:`changelog`.


Testing the installed version of Photutils
==========================================

To test your installed version of Photutils, you can run the test suite
using the `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/>`_ command.
Running the test suite requires installing the `pytest-astropy
<https://github.com/astropy/pytest-astropy>`_ (0.11 or later) package.

To run the test suite, use the following command::

    pytest --pyargs photutils

This method replaces the old method of running the test suite using the
``photutils.test()`` Python function, which has been removed.


Datasets subpackage reoganization
=================================

The ``photutils.datasets`` subpackage has been reorganized and
the ``make`` module has been deprecated. Instead of importing
functions from ``photutils.datasets.make``, import functions from
``photutils.datasets``.


Changed noise pixel values in example datasets
==============================================

The randomly-generated optional noise in the simulated
example images returned by the ``make_4gaussians_image`` and
``make_100gaussians_image`` is now slightly different. The noise sigma
is the same, but the pixel values differ. This is due to a change from
the legacy NumPy random number generator to the redesigned and preferred
random number generator introduced in NumPy 1.17.


Making simulated images with model sources
==========================================

The new :func:`~photutils.datasets.make_model_image` function creates
a simulated image with model sources. This function is useful for
testing source detection and photometry algorithms. This function
has more options and is significantly faster than the now-deprecated
``mask_model_sources_image`` function.

A new :func:`~photutils.datasets.make_model_params` function was also
added to make a table of randomly generated model positions and fluxes
for simulated sources.

These two new functions along with the existing
:func:`~photutils.datasets.make_random_models_table` function provide a
complete set of tools for creating simulated images with model sources.
Please see the examples in the documentation of these functions.

The ``make_model_sources_image``, ``make_gaussian_sources_image``,
``make_gaussian_prf_sources_image``, ``make_test_psf_data``, and
``make_random_gaussians_table`` functions are now deprecated and will be
removed in a future release.


Making simulated images with a PSF model
========================================

A specialized function, :func:`~photutils.psf.make_psf_model_image`
function was also added to generated simulated images from a PSF model.
This function returns both an image and a table of the model parameters.


PSF photometry initial parameter guesses
========================================

The ``init_params`` table input when calling
the `~photutils.psf.PSFPhotometry` or
`~photutils.psf.IterativePSFPhotometry` class now allows the user to
input columns for additional model parameters other than x, y, and flux
if those parameters are free vary in the fitting routine (i.e., not
fixed parameters). The column names must match the parameter names in
the PSF model. They can also be suffixed with either the "_init" or
"_fit" suffix.


Removed deprecated PSF photometry tools
=======================================

The deprecated ``BasicPSFPhotometry``,
``IterativelySubtractedPSFPhotometry``, ``DAOPhotPSFPhotometry``,
``DAOGroup``, ``DBSCANGroup``, and ``GroupStarsBase``, and
``NonNormalizable`` classes and the ``prepare_psf_model``,
``get_grouped_psf_model``, and ``subtract_psf`` functions were removed.


Updates to Star finders
=======================

The `~photutils.detection.DAOStarFinder`,
`~photutils.detection.IRAFStarFinder`, and
`~photutils.detection.StarFinder` classes and the
`~photutils.detection.find_peaks` functions now support input arrays
with units. This requires inputing a ``threshold`` value that also has
compatible units to the input data array.

Sources that have non-finite properties (e.g., centroid,
roundness, sharpness, etc.) are now automatically excluded
from the output table in `~photutils.detection.DAOStarFinder`,
`~photutils.detection.IRAFStarFinder`, and
`~photutils.detection.StarFinder`.

The ``sky`` keyword in `~photutils.detection.DAOStarFinder`, and
`~photutils.detection.IRAFStarFinder` is now deprecated and will be
removed in a future version. One should background subtract the image
before calling the star finders.


Improvements to Radial Profile tools
=====================================

The `~photutils.profiles.CurveOfGrowth` class now has
``calc_ee_from_radius`` and ``calc_radius_from_ee`` methods to calculate
the encircled energy (EE) at a given radius and vice versa using a cubic
interpolator.

The `~photutils.profiles.CurveOfGrowth` and
`~photutils.profiles.RadialProfile` classes now have a ``unnormalize``
method to return the profile to the state before any ``normalize`` calls
were run.


Other changes
=============

Please see the :ref:`changelog` for the complete list of changes.
