.. doctest-skip-all

****************************
What's New in Photutils 1.5?
****************************

Smoothing data prior to source detection and deblending
=======================================================

The ``kernel`` keyword was deprecated from the
`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` and
`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` functions. Instead the user
should create a (background-subtracted) convolved image and input it
directly into these functions. Doing so improves the overall performance
by omitting extra convolution steps within each function or class. Both
the (background subtracted) unconvolved and convolved images should be
input into the `~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog` class.

A `~photutils.segmentation.make_2dgaussian_kernel` convenience function
was added for creating 2D Gaussian kernels.


New SourceFinder class
======================

A new :class:`~photutils.segmentation.SourceFinder`
convenience class was added, combining source detection and
deblending. The `~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` and
`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` functions also still remain
available. The separate tools can be used, for example, to effienciently
explore the various deblending parameters.


Source Deblending Performance Improvements
==========================================

The performance of the `~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources`
has been significantly improved. Also,
`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` and
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceFinder` now have a ``nproc`` keyword to
enable multiprocessing during source deblending. Please note that due
to overheads, multiprocessing may be slower than serial processing.
This is especially true if one only has a small number of sources to
deblend. The benefits of multiprocessing require ~1000 or more sources
to deblend, with larger gains as the number of sources increase.

Also, a new ``sinh`` multi-thresholding mode was added to
`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` (also available in
the new `~photutils.segmentation.SourceFinder`).


New `~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` methods
=======================================================

`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` has a new
`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.make_source_mask` method
to create a source mask by dilating the segmentation image with a
user-defined footprint. A new `~photutils.utils.circular_footprint`
convenience function was added to create circular footprints.

There is also a new `~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.imshow`
convenience method for plotting the segmentation image.


`~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog` minimum Kron radius
===========================================================

A minimum value for the unscaled Kron radius can now be specified
as the second element of the ``kron_params`` keyword input to
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog`. The ``kron_params`` keyword now
has an optional third item representing the minimum circular radius.


Custom cutouts from `~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog`
===========================================================

The `~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog` has a new
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceCatalog.make_cutouts` method
for making custom-sized image cutouts for each labeled source
centered at their centroid. The cutouts are instances of a new
`~photutils.utils.CutoutImage` class.


PSF-Fitting Masks
=================

The `~photutils.psf.BasicPSFPhotometry`,
`~photutils.psf.IterativelySubtractedPSFPhotometry` and
`~photutils.psf.DAOPhotPSFPhotometry` PSF-fitting instances now accept
a ``mask`` keyword when called with the input data to mask bad pixels.
Invalid data values (i.e., NaN or inf) are now automatically masked
when performing PSF fitting. The Astropy/Scipy fitters do not actually
perform a fit if such invalid values are in the data.


Keyword-only arguments are now required for PSF tools
=====================================================

Keyword arguments used in the PSF tools must now be explicitly input
using the keyword name.


Progress Bars
=============

The `~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` function and the
`~photutils.psf.EPSFBuilder` class now have options to use a progress
bar using the new `tqdm <https://tqdm.github.io/>`_ optional dependency.


Other changes
=============

Please see the :ref:`changelog` for the complete list of changes.
