.. doctest-skip-all

****************************
What's New in Photutils 1.9?
****************************

Here we highlight some of the new functionality of the 1.9 release. In
addition to these major changes, Photutils 1.9 includes a large number
of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the full
:ref:`changelog`.


Improved PSF Photometry classes
-------------------------------

The `~photutils.psf.PSFPhotometry` and
`~photutils.psf.IterativePSFPhotometry` classes were added
to perform PSF photometry. They represent a complete rewrite
of the previous `~photutils.psf.BasicPSFPhotometry` and
`~photutils.psf.IterativelySubtractedPSFPhotometry` classes, but have
a similar API and functionality. The new classes are more flexible and
significantly faster than the previous classes. The new classes also
allow the input of error arrays, which will be used as weights in the
fitting. When using astropy 5.3+, these errors will also be propagated
to the model fit parameters.

Some other features of the new classes include:

  * The source grouper is optional
  * The output table is always in source ID order (not group ID order)
  * Added two quality-of-fit metrics to the output table
  * Added more information (columns and metadata) in the output table, including a flags column
  * Fit warnings are not emitted for each source. A single warning is emitted at the end of fitting.
  * Fixes issues with source masking
  * The initial parameters table is more flexible for the x, y, and flux column names
  * Supports `~astropy.nddata.NDData` objects
  * Supports units
  * Allows access to the fitter details (e.g., fit info, parameter covariances)
  * Allows access to the finder results
  * Adds a local background subtraction option

The old PSF photometry classes (`~photutils.psf.BasicPSFPhotometry`,
`~photutils.psf.IterativelySubtractedPSFPhotometry`, and
`~photutils.psf.DAOPhotPSFPhotometry`) are still available in this
release, but are deprecated. They will be removed in a future release.


New ``SourceGrouper`` class
---------------------------

The `~photutils.psf.SourceGrouper` class was added to group sources
using hierarchical agglomerative clustering with a distance criterion.
This class is used by the new `~photutils.psf.PSFPhotometry` and
`~photutils.psf.IterativePSFPhotometry` classes.

The old source grouping classes (`~photutils.psf.DAOGroup` and
`~photutils.psf.DBSCANGroup`) are still available in this release, but
are deprecated. They will be removed in a future release.


New ``LocalBackground`` class
-----------------------------

The `~photutils.background.LocalBackground` class was added to compute a
local background using a circular annulus aperture.


Reading and plotting Gridded PSF Models
---------------------------------------

A read method was added to the `~photutils.psf.GriddedPSFModel`
class to read STDPSF FITS files containing grids of ePSF models. The
`~photutils.psf.GriddedPSFModel` class also has a new ``plot_grid``
method to plot the ePSF models.

Similarly, the `~photutils.psf.STDPSFGrid` class was added to read
STDPSF FITS files. This class can read and plot multi-detector ePSF
grids. Note that it is merely a container for STDPDF files. It cannot be
used as a PSF model in the photometry classes.


Other changes
=============

Please see the :ref:`changelog` for the complete list of changes.
