.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-2.1:

****************************
What's New in Photutils 2.1?
****************************

Here we highlight some of the new functionality of the 2.1 release.
In addition to these changes, Photutils 2.1 includes several
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the full
:ref:`changelog`.


Aperture Photometry Output Table
--------------------------------

The ``aperture_photometry`` output table will now include a
``sky_center`` column if ``wcs`` is input, even if the input aperture is
not a sky aperture.

Also, the ``xcenter`` and ``ycenter`` columns in the table returned by
``aperture_photometry`` no longer have (pixel) units for consistency
with other tools in Photutils.


Deblended Labels Mapping in Segmentation Image
----------------------------------------------

The ``SegmentationImage`` class now includes properties to identify and
map any deblended labels. The ``deblended_labels`` property returns a
list of deblended labels, the ``deblended_labels_map`` property returns
a dictionary mapping the deblended labels to the parent labels, and the
``deblended_labels_inverse_map`` property returns a dictionary mapping
the parent labels to the deblended labels.


Star Finder Limits API Change
-----------------------------

Detected sources that match interval ends for sharpness, roundness, and
maximum peak values (``sharplo``, ``sharphi``, ``roundlo``, ``roundhi``,
and ``peakmax``) are now included in the returned table of detected
sources by ``DAOStarFinder`` and ``IRAFStarFinder``. Similarly, detected
sources that match the maximum peak value (``peakmax``) are now included
in the returned table of detected sources by ``StarFinder``.


Find Peaks Border Width
-----------------------

The ``find_peaks`` ``border_width`` keyword can now accept two values,
indicating the border width along the the y and x edges, respectively.


Border Exclusion in DAOStarFinder and StarFinder
------------------------------------------------

When ``exclude_border`` is set to ``True`` in the ``DAOStarFinder`` and
``StarFinder`` classes, the excluded border region can now be different
along the x and y edges if the kernel shape is rectangular.


Gini Coefficient Mask
---------------------

An optional ``mask`` keyword was added to the ``gini`` function to allow
for the exclusion of certain pixels from the calculation of the Gini
coefficient.

Also, the ``gini`` function now returns zero instead of NaN if the
(unmasked) data values sum to zero.


New params_map keyword in make_model_image
------------------------------------------

An optional ``params_map`` keyword was added to ``make_model_image`` to
allow a custom mapping between model parameter names and columns names
in the parameter table.


Improved GriddedPSFModel Plots
------------------------------

The ``'viridis'`` color map is now the default in the
``GriddedPSFModel`` ``plot_grid`` method when ``deltas=True``.

Also, the ``GriddedPSFModel`` ``plot_grid`` color bar now matches the
height of the displayed image.
