.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-2.2:

****************************
What's New in Photutils 2.2?
****************************

Here we highlight some of the new functionality of the 2.2 release.
In addition to these changes, Photutils 2.2 includes several
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the full
:ref:`changelog`.


Converting Aperture Objects to Region Objects
---------------------------------------------

A new `~photutils.aperture.aperture_to_region` function was added to
convert an `~photutils.aperture.Aperture` object to a `regions.Region`
or `regions.Regions` object. Because a `regions.Region` object can only
have one position, a `regions.Regions` object will be returned if the
input aperture has more than one position. Otherwise, a `regions.Region`
object will be returned.

The :meth:`regions.Region.write` and :meth:`regions.Regions.write`
methods can be used to write the region(s) to a file.


Segmentation Image Outlines as Regions Objects
----------------------------------------------

A new :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.to_regions`
method was added to convert the outlines of the source segments to
a `regions.Regions` object. The `regions.Regions` object contains a
list of `regions.PolygonPixelRegion` objects, one for each source
segment. The `regions.Regions` object can be written to a file using the
:meth:`regions.Region.write` method.


Raw Radial Profile
------------------

New ``data_radius`` and ``data_profile`` attributes were added to the
`~photutils.profiles.RadialProfile` class for calculating the raw radial
profile. These attributes return the radii and values of the data points
within the maximum radius defined by the input radii.


Pixel-based Aperture ``theta`` Units
------------------------------------

The ``theta`` attribute of `~photutils.aperture.EllipticalAperture`,
`~photutils.aperture.EllipticalAnnulus`,
`~photutils.aperture.RectangularAperture`, and
`~photutils.aperture.RectangularAnnulus` apertures is now always
returned as an angular `~astropy.units.Quantity` object.
