.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-3.1:

****************************
What's New in Photutils 3.1?
****************************

Here we highlight some of the new functionality of the 3.1 release.
In addition to these changes, Photutils 3.1 includes several
smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the full
:ref:`changelog`.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2


Dependency Version Updates
==========================

Photutils 3.1 bumps the minimum required versions of several key
dependencies to provide users with access to the latest features and
performance improvements:

- Astropy minimum version is now 6.1.7
- SciPy minimum version is now 1.14
- Regions minimum version is now 0.10
- scikit-image minimum version is now 0.24
- gwcs minimum version is now 0.22
- Shapely minimum version is now 2.1
- tqdm minimum version is now 4.67


ASDF Serialization Support
==========================

Photutils 3.1 introduces initial support for serializing
photutils objects to the `Advanced Scientific Data Format (ASDF)
<https://asdf.readthedocs.io/>`_ file format. This requires
installing the ``asdf`` package. For some classes, the new optional
``asdf-astropy`` package must also be installed.

    >>> import asdf
    >>> from photutils.aperture import CircularAperture
    >>> aperture = CircularAperture((10, 20), r=5)
    >>> with asdf.AsdfFile() as af:
    ...     af['aperture'] = aperture
    ...     af.write_to('aperture.asdf')
    >>> with asdf.open('aperture.asdf') as af:
    ...     aperture = af['aperture']

So far, the following classes can be serialized to and deserialized from
ASDF files:

* `~photutils.psf.AiryDiskPSF`
* `~photutils.aperture.CircularAperture`


Exact Rectangular Aperture Overlap
==================================

Rectangular apertures now support the ``method='exact'`` option for
computing pixel-aperture overlap fractions. Previously, requesting
``method='exact'`` for a `~photutils.aperture.RectangularAperture` or
`~photutils.aperture.RectangularAnnulus` was silently translated to a
32x subpixel approximation. The new implementation computes the exact
analytic overlap area using a Sutherland-Hodgman polygon-clipping
algorithm::

    >>> from photutils.aperture import RectangularAperture
    >>> aper = RectangularAperture((10.0, 10.0), w=4.0, h=2.0, theta=0.5)
    >>> mask = aper.to_mask(method='exact')


Faster Aperture Photometry
==========================

Aperture photometry is now significantly faster for all built-in
aperture shapes. The photometry for all sources is now computed in a
single call into compiled code, avoiding the per-source Python overhead
of creating individual aperture masks and cutouts. Typical speedups
range from ~2x to more than 25x, depending on the aperture shape and
overlap method, with the largest gains for fields with many sources.


Faster Aperture Statistics
==========================

`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats` is now significantly faster. The
per-source statistics are computed in a single call into compiled code,
reusing the same fast pixel-overlap machinery as the aperture photometry
improvements above. Sigma-clipped statistics are also computed in
compiled code for the common `~astropy.stats.SigmaClip` configurations.
Typical speedups range from ~5x to ~15x, depending on which properties
are requested.


Aperture Statistics Error Estimates
===================================

`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats` now provides standard-error
estimates for its location statistics via the new ``mean_err`` and
``median_err`` properties. The ``mean_err`` property returns the
standard error of the mean, :math:`s / \sqrt{N}`, where :math:`s` is
the sample standard deviation of the unmasked aperture pixels and
:math:`N` is the number of those pixels. The ``median_err`` property
returns the large-sample standard error of the median,
:math:`\sqrt{\pi / 2} \, s / \sqrt{N}`, which assumes the pixel values
are approximately normally distributed. Both properties are ``NaN`` for
apertures with fewer than two unmasked pixels::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from photutils.aperture import ApertureStats, CircularAperture
    >>> rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=0)
    >>> data = rng.normal(100.0, 5.0, (100, 100))
    >>> aper = CircularAperture((50, 50), r=10)
    >>> stats = ApertureStats(data, aper)
    >>> stats.mean_err
    0.27447881801886487


Sample Variance and Standard Deviation
======================================

`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats` now accepts a ``ddof`` keyword that
sets the delta degrees of freedom used when computing the ``var`` and
``std`` properties. The divisor used in the calculation is
:math:`N - \mathrm{ddof}`, where :math:`N` is the number of unmasked
pixels within the aperture. The default is ``ddof=0``, which gives the
population variance and standard deviation (unchanged from previous
versions). Use ``ddof=1`` to obtain the sample (unbiased) variance and
standard deviation::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from photutils.aperture import ApertureStats, CircularAperture
    >>> rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=0)
    >>> data = rng.normal(100.0, 5.0, (100, 100))
    >>> aper = CircularAperture((50, 50), r=10)
    >>> stats = ApertureStats(data, aper, ddof=1)
    >>> stats.std
    4.793566477062262

The ``ddof`` keyword affects only the ``var`` and ``std`` properties.
All other properties are unaffected, including the ``mean_err`` and
``median_err`` standard errors, which are always computed using the
sample standard deviation regardless of the value of ``ddof``.


Thread-Safe and Free-Threading-Compatible Aperture Photometry
==============================================================

The new aperture photometry implementation releases the Python global
interpreter lock (GIL) during the computation and uses no global state,
making it safe to call concurrently from multiple threads. The compiled
extensions are also declared compatible with free-threaded CPython
builds, so threads can run the computation truly in parallel.

For example, photometry of many apertures on a large image can be
parallelized across threads by splitting the source positions into
chunks::

    >>> from concurrent.futures import ThreadPoolExecutor
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy.table import vstack
    >>> from photutils.aperture import (AperturePhotometry,
    ...                                 CircularAperture)
    >>> rng = np.random.default_rng(seed=0)
    >>> data = rng.random((4096, 4096))
    >>> positions = rng.uniform(0, 4096, (100_000, 2))
    >>> n_workers = 10
    >>> chunks = [CircularAperture(pos, r=5.0)
    ...           for pos in np.array_split(positions, n_workers)]
    >>> with ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=n_workers) as executor:
    ...     results = list(executor.map(
    ...         lambda aper: AperturePhotometry(data, aper), chunks))
    >>> tables = [result.to_table() for result in results]
    >>> phot_table = vstack(tables)
    >>> phot_table['id'] = np.arange(1, len(phot_table) + 1)

Note that the ``id`` column of each chunk's table is numbered starting
from 1, so the last line renumbers the stacked ``id`` column to match
the input source order. Because ``executor.map`` returns results in
input order, the stacked table rows are in the same order as the input
``positions``.


Polygon Apertures
=================

Two new aperture classes have been added:
`~photutils.aperture.PolygonAperture` and
`~photutils.aperture.SkyPolygonAperture`. Like the other aperture types,
they have a single fixed shape (parameterized by ``vertex_offsets``)
that can be applied at one or more positions::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from photutils.aperture import PolygonAperture
    >>> positions = [(10.0, 20.0), (30.0, 40.0)]
    >>> # A regular hexagon centered on each position
    >>> outer_radius = 5.0
    >>> theta = np.linspace(0.0, 2 * np.pi, 6, endpoint=False)
    >>> offsets = np.column_stack([outer_radius * np.cos(theta),
    ...                            outer_radius * np.sin(theta)])
    >>> aper = PolygonAperture(positions, offsets)

The polygon must be simple (non-self-intersecting), but it does not need
to be convex; non-convex shapes such as L-shapes or stars are fully
supported.

Regular polygons can be constructed by specifying a center,
the number of vertices, the `circumradius (outer radius)
<https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Circumradius.html>`_, and an optional
rotation angle via the ``from_regular_polygon`` classmethod. The
``is_regular`` property reports whether a polygon is regular, and the
``outer_radius``, ``inner_radius``, ``side_length``, ``interior_angle``,
``exterior_angle``, and ``theta`` properties expose the geometric
parameters of regular polygons (they raise ``ValueError`` for
non-regular polygons)::

    >>> hexagon = PolygonAperture.from_regular_polygon((10.0, 20.0),
    ...                                                n_vertices=6,
    ...                                                radius=5.0)
    >>> hexagon.is_regular
    True
    >>> hexagon.outer_radius
    5.0
    >>> hexagon.interior_angle
    <Quantity 120. deg>

A ``from_vertices`` classmethod is also provided as a convenience for
building a single polygon directly from absolute pixel or sky vertex
coordinates::

    >>> verts = [(0.0, 0.0), (4.0, 0.0), (4.0, 3.0)]
    >>> aper = PolygonAperture.from_vertices(verts)

Both polygon aperture classes also expose a ``vertices`` attribute
returning the absolute vertex coordinates at every aperture position.

Conversions between `~photutils.aperture.PolygonAperture` and
`~photutils.aperture.SkyPolygonAperture` use ``wcs.pixel_to_world`` and
``wcs.world_to_pixel`` directly on the absolute vertex coordinates,
so the conversion captures the actual finite-displacement WCS
transformation of the polygon corners.

``aperture_to_region`` and ``region_to_aperture`` also now support
`~regions.PolygonPixelRegion` and `~regions.PolygonSkyRegion`.


Converting Apertures to Polygons
================================

The circular, elliptical, and rectangular apertures (both their pixel
and sky variants) now have a ``to_polygon`` method that converts
them to an equivalent `~photutils.aperture.PolygonAperture` or
`~photutils.aperture.SkyPolygonAperture`. The circular and elliptical
apertures are approximated by a polygon with a configurable number of
vertices (``n_vertices``, default 100), while the rectangular aperture
is converted exactly to a four-vertex polygon::

    >>> from photutils.aperture import CircularAperture
    >>> aper = CircularAperture((10.0, 20.0), r=5.0)
    >>> poly = aper.to_polygon(n_vertices=100)


Segmentation-Based Masking in Aperture Photometry
=================================================

`~photutils.aperture.AperturePhotometry` and
`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats` now accept ``segmentation_image``,
``labels``, and ``mask_method`` keywords to mask or correct
the flux from neighboring sources that overlap an aperture.
The ``segmentation_image`` (see :ref:`Image Segmentation
<image_segmentation>`) labels each source with a positive integer, and
the ``mask_method`` keyword selects how neighboring sources are handled:

* ``'none'`` (default): the segmentation image is ignored.
* ``'mask'``: pixels belonging to neighboring sources are excluded.
* ``'source_only'``: only pixels belonging to the target source are
  included.
* ``'correct'``: neighboring-source pixels are replaced by the values
  mirrored across the aperture center (excluded if the mirror pixel is
  unavailable).

It is required to explicitly provide the source ``labels`` for each
aperture when a ``segmentation_image`` is input and ``mask_method`` is
not ``'none'``. The ``labels`` keyword must have the same length as
the number of aperture positions and identifies the target source for
each aperture. Requiring explicit labels ensures the correct target
source is used for each aperture, which is especially important for
irregularly shaped source segmentation footprints or for apertures
that are not centered on a source.

Example of using the new segmentation-based masking::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from photutils.aperture import AperturePhotometry, CircularAperture
    >>> data = np.ones((11, 11))
    >>> data[4:7, 4:7] = 10.0  # target source
    >>> data[4:7, 7:10] = 50.0  # bright neighbor
    >>> segm = np.zeros((11, 11), dtype=int)
    >>> segm[4:7, 4:7] = 1
    >>> segm[4:7, 7:10] = 2
    >>> labels = 1
    >>> aperture = CircularAperture((5, 5), r=4)
    >>> phot = AperturePhotometry(data, aperture, segmentation_image=segm,
    ...                           labels=1, mask_method='mask')


.. _whatsnew-3.1-aperture-flags:

Aperture Photometry Quality Flags
=================================

Aperture photometry and statistics now provide
per-source bitwise quality flags, unified across
the `~photutils.aperture.AperturePhotometry` and
`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats` classes. (e.g., new
:attr:`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats.flags` and
:attr:`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats.sum_flags` properties,
included in the default ``to_table()`` columns). In
`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats`, ``flags`` reports the flags for the
value statistics (the ``'center'``-method footprint) and ``sum_flags``
reports the flags for the sum properties (the ``sum_method`` footprint).
A flag value of 0 means that no issues were detected. The flags indicate
conditions such as:

* the aperture is partially (``'partial_overlap'``) or fully
  (``'no_overlap'``) outside the data
* the aperture contains no pixels with nonzero weight
  (``'no_pixels'``)
* input-masked pixels within the aperture (``'masked_pixels'``), or
  no valid pixels at all (``'all_masked'``)
* non-finite data or error values within the aperture
  (``'non_finite_data'``, ``'non_finite_error'``)
* pixels excluded or corrected due to neighboring sources in a
  segmentation image (``'neighbor_pixels'``, ``'uncorrected_pixels'``)
* sigma-clipped pixels within the aperture (``'sigma_clipped'``,
  ``'all_clipped'``) and too few pixels to compute a statistic
  (``'too_few_pixels'``) in `~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats`

The overlap flags are precise. They are based on the pixels with
nonzero aperture weight, not simply the aperture bounding box. The
new :func:`~photutils.aperture.decode_aperture_flags` function and
the :meth:`~photutils.aperture.AperturePhotometry.decode_flags` and
:meth:`~photutils.aperture.ApertureStats.decode_flags` methods decode
flag values into human-readable names::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from photutils.aperture import (AperturePhotometry,
    ...                                 CircularAperture,
    ...                                 decode_aperture_flags)
    >>> data = np.ones((25, 25))
    >>> mask = np.zeros(data.shape, dtype=bool)
    >>> mask[12, 12] = True  # bad pixel inside the first aperture
    >>> positions = [(12.0, 12.0), (0.0, 12.0), (-50.0, 12.0)]
    >>> aperture = CircularAperture(positions, r=3.0)
    >>> phot = AperturePhotometry(data, aperture, mask=mask)
    >>> decoded = decode_aperture_flags(phot.flags)
    >>> for source_id, names in zip(phot.id, decoded):
    ...     print(source_id, names)
    1 ['masked_pixels']
    2 ['partial_overlap']
    3 ['no_overlap', 'no_pixels']

See :ref:`aperture_flags` for more details.


``GriddedPSFModel`` Performance Improvements
============================================

``GriddedPSFModel`` evaluations are now significantly faster, with
typical performance improvements of approximately 20–25%. The
optimizations reduce the overhead of PSF interpolation, improving the
runtime of PSF photometry workflows.

.. _whatsnew-3.1-api-changes:


API Changes
===========

.. _whatsnew-3.1-deprecations:

New Deprecations
----------------

``EPSFBuildResult`` Renamed to ``EPSFBuildResults``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``EPSFBuildResult`` class returned by `~photutils.psf.EPSFBuilder`
has been renamed to `~photutils.psf.EPSFBuildResults`. The old
``EPSFBuildResult`` name is deprecated and will be removed in a future
version.


Removed Deprecations
--------------------


.. _whatsnew-3.1-breaking-changes:

Breaking Changes
----------------
