Background Estimation (`photutils.background`)
==============================================

Introduction
------------

To accurately measure the photometry and morphological properties of
astronomical sources, one requires an accurate estimate of the
background, which can be from both the sky and the detector.
Similarly, having an accurate estimate of the background noise is
important for determining the significance of source detections and
for estimating photometric errors.

Unfortunately, accurate background and background noise estimation is
a difficult task.  Further, because astronomical images can cover a
wide variety of scenes, there is not a single background estimation
method that will always be applicable. Photutils provides tools for
estimating the background and background noise in your data, but they
will likely require some tweaking to optimize the background estimate
for your data.


Scalar Background and Noise Estimation
--------------------------------------

Simple Statistics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the background level and noise are relatively constant across an
image, the simplest way to estimate these values is to derive scalar
quantities using simple approximations.  Of course, when computing the
image statistics one must take into account the astronomical sources
present in the images, which add a positive tail to the distribution
of pixel intensities. For example, one may consider using the image
median as the background level and the image standard deviation as the
1-sigma background noise, but the resulting values are obviously
biased by the presence of real sources.

A slightly better method involves using statistics that are robust
against the presence of outliers, such as the biweight location for
the background level and biweight scale or `median absolute deviation
(MAD) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Median_absolute_deviation>`_ for
the background noise estimation. However, for most astronomical scenes
these methods will also be biased by the presence of astronomical
sources in the image.

As an example, we load a synthetic image comprised of 100 sources with
a Gaussian-distributed background whose mean is 5 and standard
deviation is 2::

    >>> from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    >>> data = make_100gaussians_image()

Let's plot the image:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    >>> from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    >>> plt.imshow(data, norm=norm, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')

.. plot::

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data, norm=norm, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')

The image median and biweight location are both larger than the true
background level of 5::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> from astropy.stats import biweight_location
    >>> print(np.median(data))  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    5.225529518399048
    >>> print(biweight_location(data))  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    5.186759755495727

Similarly, using the median absolute deviation to estimate the
background noise level gives a value that is larger than the true
value of 2::

    >>> from astropy.stats import mad_std
    >>> print(mad_std(data))  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    2.1443760096598914


Sigma Clipping Sources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The most widely used technique to remove the sources from the image
statistics is called sigma clipping.  Briefly, pixels that are above
or below a specified sigma level from the median are discarded and the
statistics are recalculated.  The procedure is typically repeated over
a number of iterations or until convergence is reached.  This method
provides a better estimate of the background and background noise
levels::

    >>> from astropy.stats import sigma_clipped_stats
    >>> mean, median, std = sigma_clipped_stats(data, sigma=3.0)
    >>> print((mean, median, std))  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    (5.199138651621793, 5.155587433358291, 2.094275212132969)


Masking Sources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An even better procedure is to exclude the sources in the image by
masking them.  Of course, this technique requires one to `identify the
sources in the data <detection.html>`_, which in turn depends on the
background and background noise.  Therefore, this method for
estimating the background and background RMS requires an iterative
procedure.

Photutils provides a convenience function,
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.make_source_mask`, for creating source
masks.  It uses sigma-clipped statistics as the first estimate of the
background and noise levels for the source detection.  Sources are
then identified using image segmentation.  Finally, the source masks
are dilated to mask more extended regions around the detected sources.

Here we use an aggressive 2-sigma detection threshold to maximize the
source detections and dilate using a 11x11 box:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> from photutils import make_source_mask
    >>> mask = make_source_mask(data, snr=2, npixels=5, dilate_size=11)
    >>> mean, median, std = sigma_clipped_stats(data, sigma=3.0, mask=mask)
    >>> print((mean, median, std))  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    (5.001013475475569, 5.000584905604376, 1.970887100626572)

Of course, the source detection and masking procedure can be iterated
further.  Even with one iteration we are within 0.02% of the true
background and 1.5% of the true background RMS.

.. _scipy: http://www.scipy.org/


2D Background and Noise Estimation
----------------------------------

If the background or the background noise varies across the image,
then you will generally want to generate a 2D image of the background
and background RMS (or compute these values locally).  This can be
accomplished by applying the above techniques to subregions of the
image.  A common procedure is to use sigma-clipped statistics in each
mesh of a grid that covers the input data to create a low-resolution
background image.  The final background or background RMS image can
then be generated by interpolating the low-resolution image.

Photutils provides the :class:`~photutils.background.Background2D`
class to estimate the 2D background and background noise in an
astronomical image. :class:`~photutils.background.Background2D`
requires the size of the box (``box_size``) in which to estimate the
background.  Selecting the box size requires some care by the user.
The box size should generally be larger than the typical size of
sources in the image, but small enough to encapsulate any background
variations.  For best results, the box size should also be chosen so
that the data are covered by an integer number of boxes in both
dimensions.  If that is not the case, the ``edge_method`` keyword
determines whether to pad or crop the image such that there is an
integer multiple of the ``box_size`` in both dimensions.

The background level in each of the meshes is calculated using the
function or callable object (e.g. class instance) input via
``bkg_estimator`` keyword.  Photutils provides a several background
classes that can be used:

* `~photutils.background.MeanBackground`
* `~photutils.background.MedianBackground`
* `~photutils.background.ModeEstimatorBackground`
* `~photutils.background.MMMBackground`
* `~photutils.background.SExtractorBackground`
* `~photutils.background.BiweightLocationBackground`

The default is a `~photutils.background.SExtractorBackground`
instance.  For this method, the background in each mesh is calculated
as ``(2.5 * median) - (1.5 * mean)``.  However, if ``(mean - median) /
std > 0.3`` then the ``median`` is used instead (despite what the
`SExtractor <http://www.astromatic.net/software/sextractor>`_ User's
Manual says, this is the method it always uses).

Likewise, the background RMS level in each mesh is calculated using
the function or callable object input via the ``bkgrms_estimator``
keyword.  Photutils provides the following classes for this purpose:

* `~photutils.background.StdBackgroundRMS`
* `~photutils.background.MADStdBackgroundRMS`
* `~photutils.background.BiweightScaleBackgroundRMS`

For even more flexibility, users may input a custom function or
callable object to the ``bkg_estimator`` and/or ``bkgrms_estimator``
keywords.

By default the ``bkg_estimator`` and ``bkgrms_estimator`` are applied
to sigma clipped data.  Sigma clipping is defined by inputting a
:class:`astropy.stats.SigmaClip` object to the ``sigma_clip`` keyword.
The default is to perform sigma clipping with ``sigma=3`` and
``maxiters=10``.  Sigma clipping can be turned off by setting
``sigma_clip=None``.

After the background level has been determined in each of the boxes,
the low-resolution background image can be median filtered, with a
window of size of ``filter_size``, to suppress local under- or
overestimations (e.g., due to bright galaxies in a particular box).
Likewise, the median filter can be applied only to those boxes where
the background level is above a specified threshold
(``filter_threshold``).

The low-resolution background and background RMS images are resized to
the original data size using the function or callable object
input via the ``interpolator`` keyword.  Photutils provides two
interpolator classes:
:class:`~photutils.background.BkgZoomInterpolator` (default), which
performs spline interpolation, and
:class:`~photutils.background.BkgIDWInterpolator`, which uses
inverse-distance weighted (IDW) interpolation.

For this example, we will create a test image by adding a strong
background gradient to the image defined above::

    >>> ny, nx = data.shape
    >>> y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    >>> gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    >>> data2 = data + gradient
    >>> plt.imshow(data2, norm=norm, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')  # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data2, norm=norm, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')

We start by creating a `~photutils.background.Background2D` object
using a box size of 50x50 and a 3x3 median filter.  We will estimate
the background level in each mesh as the sigma-clipped median using an
instance of :class:`~photutils.background.MedianBackground`.

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> from astropy.stats import SigmaClip
    >>> from photutils import Background2D, MedianBackground
    >>> sigma_clip = SigmaClip(sigma=3.)
    >>> bkg_estimator = MedianBackground()
    >>> bkg = Background2D(data2, (50, 50), filter_size=(3, 3),
    ...                    sigma_clip=sigma_clip, bkg_estimator=bkg_estimator)


The 2D background and background RMS images are retrieved using the
``background`` and ``background_rms`` attributes, respectively, on the
returned object.  The low-resolution versions of these images are
stored in the ``background_mesh`` and ``background_rms_mesh``
attributes, respectively.   The global median value of the
low-resolution background and background RMS image can be accessed
with the ``background_median`` and ``background_rms_median``
attributes, respectively:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> print(bkg.background_median)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    10.821997862561792
    >>> print(bkg.background_rms_median)  # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    2.298820539683762

Let's plot the background image:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> plt.imshow(bkg.background, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')

.. plot::

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import SigmaClip
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import Background2D, MedianBackground
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    sigma_clip = SigmaClip(sigma=3.)
    bkg_estimator = MedianBackground()
    bkg = Background2D(data2, (50, 50), filter_size=(3, 3),
                       sigma_clip=sigma_clip, bkg_estimator=bkg_estimator)
    plt.imshow(bkg.background, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r')

and the background-subtracted image:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> plt.imshow(data2 - bkg.background, norm=norm, origin='lower',
    ...            cmap='Greys_r')

.. plot::

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import SigmaClip
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import Background2D, MedianBackground
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    sigma_clip = SigmaClip(sigma=3.)
    bkg_estimator = MedianBackground()
    bkg = Background2D(data2, (50, 50), filter_size=(3, 3),
                       sigma_clip=sigma_clip, bkg_estimator=bkg_estimator)
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data2 - bkg.background, norm=norm, origin='lower',
               cmap='Greys_r')


Masking
^^^^^^^

Masks can also be input into `~photutils.background.Background2D`.  As
described above, this can be employed to mask sources in the image
prior to estimating the background levels.

Additionally, input masks are often necessary if your data array
includes regions without data coverage (e.g., from a rotated image or
an image from a mosaic).  Otherwise the data values in the regions
without coverage (usually zeros or NaNs) will adversely contribute to
the background statistics.

Let's create such an image and plot it (NOTE: this example requires
`scipy`_):

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> from scipy.ndimage import rotate
    >>> data3 = rotate(data2, -45.)
    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.imshow(data3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)  # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::

    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from scipy.ndimage.interpolation import rotate
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    data3 = rotate(data2, -45.)
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)

Now we create a coverage mask and input it into
`~photutils.background.Background2D` to exclude the regions where we
have no data.  For real data, one can usually create a coverage mask
from a weight or noise image.  In this example we also use a smaller
box size to help capture the strong gradient in the background:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> mask = (data3 == 0)
    >>> bkg3 = Background2D(data3, (25, 25), filter_size=(3, 3), mask=mask)

The input masks are never applied to the returned background image
because the input ``mask`` can represent either a coverage mask or a
source mask, or a combination of both.  Therefore, we need to manually
apply the coverage mask to the returned background image:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> back3 = bkg3.background * ~mask
    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())  # doctest: +SKIP
    >>> plt.imshow(back3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)  # doctest: +SKIP

.. plot::

    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils.background import Background2D
    from scipy.ndimage.interpolation import rotate
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    data3 = rotate(data2, -45.)
    mask = (data3 == 0)
    bkg3 = Background2D(data3, (25, 25), filter_size=(3, 3), mask=mask)
    back3 = bkg3.background * ~mask
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(back3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)

Finally, let's subtract the background from the image and plot it:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    >>> plt.imshow(data3 - back3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)

.. plot::

    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils.background import Background2D
    from scipy.ndimage.interpolation import rotate
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    data3 = rotate(data2, -45.)
    mask = (data3 == 0)
    bkg3 = Background2D(data3, (25, 25), filter_size=(3, 3), mask=mask)
    back3 = bkg3.background * ~mask
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data3 - back3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)

If there is any small residual background still present in the image,
the background subtraction can be improved by masking the sources
and/or through further iterations.


Plotting Meshes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Finally, the meshes that were used in generating the 2D background can
be plotted on the original image using the
:meth:`~photutils.background.Background2D.plot_meshes` method:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> plt.imshow(data3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    >>> bkg3.plot_meshes(outlines=True, color='#1f77b4')

.. plot::

    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils.background import Background2D
    from scipy.ndimage.interpolation import rotate
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    ny, nx = data.shape
    y, x = np.mgrid[:ny, :nx]
    gradient =  x * y / 5000.
    data2 = data + gradient
    data3 = rotate(data2, -45.)
    mask = (data3 == 0)
    bkg3 = Background2D(data3, (25, 25), filter_size=(3, 3), mask=mask)
    back3 = bkg3.background * ~mask
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    plt.imshow(data3, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    bkg3.plot_meshes(outlines=True, color='#17becf')

The meshes extended beyond the original image on the top and right
because :class:`~photutils.background.Background2D`'s default
``edge_method`` is ``'pad'``.


Reference/API
-------------

.. automodapi:: photutils.background
    :no-heading:
