.. _image_segmentation:

Image Segmentation (`photutils.segmentation`)
=============================================

Introduction
------------

Photutils includes a general-use function to detect sources (both
point-like and extended) in an image using a process called `image
segmentation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_segmentation>`_ in
the `computer vision <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_vision>`_
field.  After detecting sources using image segmentation, we can then
measure their photometry, centroids, and morphological properties by
using additional tools in Photutils.


Source Extraction Using Image Segmentation
------------------------------------------

Photutils provides tools to detect astronomical sources using image
segmentation, which is a process of assigning a label to every pixel
in an image such that pixels with the same label are part of the same
source.  The segmentation procedure implemented in Photutils is called
the threshold method, where detected sources must have a minimum
number of connected pixels that are each greater than a specified
threshold value in an image.  The threshold level is usually defined
at some multiple of the background noise (sigma) above the background.
The image can also be filtered before thresholding to smooth the noise
and maximize the detectability of objects with a shape similar to the
filter kernel.

Let's start by detecting sources in a synthetic image provided
by the `photutils.datasets <datasets.html>`_ module::

    >>> from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    >>> data = make_100gaussians_image()

The source segmentation/extraction is performed using the
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` function.  We will use
a convenience function called
:func:`~photutils.detection.detect_threshold` to produce a 2D
detection threshold image using simple sigma-clipped statistics to
estimate the background level and RMS.

The threshold level is calculated using the ``nsigma`` input as the
number of standard deviations (per pixel) above the background.  Here
we generate a simple threshold at 2 sigma (per pixel) above the
background::

    >>> from photutils import detect_threshold
    >>> threshold = detect_threshold(data, nsigma=2.)

For more sophisticated analyses, one should generate a 2D background
and background-only error image (e.g., from your data reduction or by
using :class:`~photutils.background.Background2D`).  In that case, a
2-sigma threshold image is simply::

    >>> threshold = bkg + (2.0 * bkg_rms)  # doctest: +SKIP

Note that if the threshold includes the background level (as above),
then the image input into
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` should *not* be
background subtracted.  In other words, the input threshold value(s)
are compared directly to the input image.  Because the threshold
returned by :func:`~photutils.detection.detect_threshold` includes the
background, we do not subtract the background from the data here.

Let's find sources that have 5 connected pixels that are each greater
than the corresponding pixel-wise ``threshold`` level defined above
(i.e. 2 sigma per pixel above the background noise).  Note that by
default "connected pixels" means "8-connected" pixels, where pixels
touch along their edges or corners.  One can also use "4-connected"
pixels that touch only along their edges by setting ``connectivity=4``
in :func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources`.

We will also input a 2D circular Gaussian kernel with a FWHM of 3
pixels to smooth the image some prior to thresholding:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    >>> from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    >>> from photutils import detect_sources
    >>> sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    >>> kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    >>> kernel.normalize()
    >>> segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)

The result is a :class:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage`
object with the same shape as the data, where detected sources are
labeled by different positive integer values.  A value of zero is
always reserved for the background.  Let's plot both the image and the
segmentation image showing the detected sources:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    >>> from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    >>> fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10, 12.5))
    >>> ax1.imshow(data, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    >>> ax1.set_title('Data')
    >>> cmap = segm.make_cmap(random_state=12345)
    >>> ax2.imshow(segm, origin='lower', cmap=cmap)
    >>> ax2.set_title('Segmentation Image')

.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import detect_threshold, detect_sources
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    threshold = detect_threshold(data, nsigma=2.)
    sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    kernel.normalize()
    segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10, 12.5))
    ax1.imshow(data, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    ax1.set_title('Data')
    cmap = segm.make_cmap(random_state=12345)
    ax2.imshow(segm, origin='lower', cmap=cmap)
    ax2.set_title('Segmentation Image')
    plt.tight_layout()

When the segmentation image is generated using image thresholding
(e.g., using :func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources`), the
source segments represent the isophotal footprint of each source.


Source Deblending
-----------------

In the example above, overlapping sources are detected as single
sources.  Separating those sources requires a deblending procedure,
such as a multi-thresholding technique used by `SExtractor
<http://www.astromatic.net/software/sextractor>`_.  Photutils provides
a :func:`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` function that
deblends sources uses a combination of multi-thresholding and
`watershed segmentation
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watershed_(image_processing)>`_.  Note
that in order to deblend sources, they must be separated enough such
that there is a saddle between them.

The amount of deblending can be controlled with the two
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.deblend_sources` keywords ``nlevels``
and ``contrast``.  ``nlevels`` is the number of multi-thresholding
levels to use.  ``contrast`` is the fraction of the total source flux
that a local peak must have to be considered as a separate object.

Here's a simple example of source deblending:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> from photutils import deblend_sources
    >>> segm_deblend = deblend_sources(data, segm, npixels=5,
    ...                                filter_kernel=kernel, nlevels=32,
    ...                                contrast=0.001)

where ``segm`` is the
:class:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` that was generated
by :func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources`.  Note that the
``npixels`` and ``filter_kernel`` input values should match those used
in :func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` to generate
``segm``.  The result is a new
:class:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` object containing
the deblended segmentation image:

.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import detect_threshold, detect_sources, deblend_sources

    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    threshold = detect_threshold(data, nsigma=2.)
    sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    kernel.normalize()
    segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)
    segm_deblend = deblend_sources(data, segm, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)

    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(10, 6.5))
    cmap = segm_deblend.make_cmap(random_state=12345)
    ax.imshow(segm_deblend, origin='lower', cmap=cmap)
    ax.set_title('Deblended Segmentation Image')
    plt.tight_layout()

Let's plot one of the deblended sources:

.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import detect_threshold, detect_sources, deblend_sources

    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    threshold = detect_threshold(data, nsigma=2.)
    sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    kernel.normalize()
    segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)
    segm_deblend = deblend_sources(data, segm, npixels=5, filter_kernel=kernel)

    fig, (ax1, ax2, ax3) = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(10, 4))
    slc = (slice(273, 297), slice(425, 444))
    ax1.imshow(data[slc], origin='lower')
    ax1.set_title('Data')
    cmap1 = segm.make_cmap(random_state=123)
    ax2.imshow(segm.data[slc], origin='lower', cmap=cmap1)
    ax2.set_title('Original Segment')
    cmap2 = segm_deblend.make_cmap(random_state=123)
    ax3.imshow(segm_deblend.data[slc], origin='lower', cmap=cmap2)
    ax3.set_title('Deblended Segments')
    plt.tight_layout()


Modifying a Segmentation Image
------------------------------

The :class:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` object provides
several methods that can be used to visualize or modify itself (e.g.,
combining labels, removing labels, removing border segments) prior to
measuring source photometry and other source properties, including:

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.reassign_label`:
    Reassign one or more label numbers.

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.relabel_consecutive`:
    Reassign the label numbers consecutively, such that there are no
    missing label numbers (up to the maximum label number).

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.keep_labels`:
    Keep only the specified labels.

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.remove_labels`:
    Remove one or more labels.

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.remove_border_labels`:
    Remove labeled segments near the image border.

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.remove_masked_labels`:
    Remove labeled segments located within a masked region.

  * :meth:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage.outline_segments`:
    Outline the labeled segments for plotting.


Centroids, Photometry, and Morphological Properties
---------------------------------------------------

The :func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` function is the
primary tool for measuring the centroids, photometry, and
morphological properties of sources defined in a segmentation image.
When the segmentation image is generated using image thresholding
(e.g., using :func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources`), the
source segments represent the isophotal footprint of each source and
the resulting photometry is effectively isophotal photometry.

:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` returns a
:class:`~photutils.SourceCatalog` object, which acts in part like a
list of :class:`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties` objects, one
for each segmented source (or a specified subset of sources).  An
Astropy `~astropy.table.QTable` of source properties can be generated
using the :meth:`~photutils.SourceCatalog.to_table` method.  Please
see :class:`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties` for the list of
the many properties that are calculated for each source.  More
properties are likely to be added in the future.

Let's detect sources and measure their properties in a synthetic
image.  For this example, we will use the
:class:`~photutils.background.Background2D` class to produce a
background and background noise image.  We define a 2D detection
threshold image using the background and background RMS images.  We
set the threshold at 2 sigma (per pixel) above the background:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy

    >>> from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    >>> from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    >>> from photutils import Background2D, MedianBackground
    >>> from photutils import detect_threshold, detect_sources
    >>> data = make_100gaussians_image()
    >>> bkg_estimator = MedianBackground()
    >>> bkg = Background2D(data, (50, 50), filter_size=(3, 3),
    ...                    bkg_estimator=bkg_estimator)
    >>> threshold = bkg.background + (2. * bkg.background_rms)

Now we find sources that have 5 connected pixels that are each greater
than the corresponding threshold image defined above.  Because the
threshold includes the background, we do not subtract the background
from the data here.  We also input a 2D circular Gaussian kernel with
a FWHM of 3 pixels to filter the image prior to thresholding:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    >>> sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    >>> kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    >>> kernel.normalize()
    >>> npixels = 5
    >>> segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=npixels,
    ...                       filter_kernel=kernel)
    >>> segm_deblend = deblend_sources(data, segm, npixels=npixels,
    ...                                filter_kernel=kernel, nlevels=32,
    ...                                contrast=0.001)

As described earlier, the result is a
:class:`~photutils.segmentation.SegmentationImage` where sources are
labeled by different positive integer values.

Now let's measure the properties of the detected sources defined in
the segmentation image using the simplest call to
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties`.  The output
`~astropy.table.QTable` of source properties is generated by the
:class:`~photutils.SourceCatalog`
:meth:`~photutils.SourceCatalog.to_table` method.  Each row in the
table represents a source.  The columns represent the calculated
source properties.  Note that the only a subset of the source
properties are shown below.  Please see
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties` for the list of the many
properties that are calculated for each source:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> from photutils import source_properties
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend)
    >>> tbl = cat.to_table()
    >>> tbl['xcentroid'].info.format = '.2f'  # optional format
    >>> tbl['ycentroid'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl['cxx'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl['cxy'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl['cyy'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl['gini'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> print(tbl)
     id xcentroid ycentroid sky_centroid ...   cxx      cxy      cyy    gini
           pix       pix                 ... 1 / pix2 1 / pix2 1 / pix2
    --- --------- --------- ------------ ... -------- -------- -------- ----
      1    235.22      1.25         None ...     0.17    -0.20     0.99 0.18
      2    493.82      5.77         None ...     0.16    -0.32     0.61 0.13
      3    207.30     10.02         None ...     0.37     0.49     0.30 0.16
      4    364.75     11.13         None ...     0.39    -0.33     0.18 0.13
      5    258.37     11.77         None ...     0.37     0.15     0.16 0.13
    ...       ...       ...          ... ...      ...      ...      ...  ...
     92    427.01    147.45         None ...     0.26    -0.07     0.12 0.12
     93    426.60    211.14         None ...     0.67     0.24     0.35 0.41
     94    419.79    216.68         None ...     0.17    -0.19     0.27 0.14
     95    433.91    280.73         None ...     0.52    -0.83     0.49 0.23
     96    434.11    288.90         None ...     0.18    -0.19     0.30 0.24
    Length = 96 rows

Let's use the measured morphological properties to define approximate
isophotal ellipses for each source.  Here we define an
`~photutils.aperture.EllipticalAperture` object for each source using
its calculated centroid positions
(`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.xcentroid` and
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.ycentroid`) , semimajor and
semiminor axes lengths
(`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.semimajor_axis_sigma` and
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.semiminor_axis_sigma`) , and
orientation (`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.orientation`):

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import astropy.units as u
    >>> from photutils import source_properties, EllipticalAperture
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend)
    >>> r = 3.  # approximate isophotal extent
    >>> apertures = []
    >>> for obj in cat:
    ...     position = np.transpose((obj.xcentroid.value, obj.ycentroid.value))
    ...     a = obj.semimajor_axis_sigma.value * r
    ...     b = obj.semiminor_axis_sigma.value * r
    ...     theta = obj.orientation.to(u.rad).value
    ...     apertures.append(EllipticalAperture(position, a, b, theta=theta))

Now let's plot the derived elliptical apertures on the data:

.. doctest-skip::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    >>> from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    >>> from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    >>> norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    >>> fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10, 12.5))
    >>> ax1.imshow(data, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    >>> ax1.set_title('Data')
    >>> cmap = segm_deblend.make_cmap(random_state=12345)
    >>> ax2.imshow(segm_deblend, origin='lower', cmap=cmap)
    >>> ax2.set_title('Segmentation Image')
    >>> for aperture in apertures:
    ...     aperture.plot(axes=ax1, color='white', lw=1.5)
    ...     aperture.plot(axes=ax2, color='white', lw=1.5)

.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from astropy.stats import gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma
    from astropy.convolution import Gaussian2DKernel
    import astropy.units as u
    from astropy.visualization import SqrtStretch
    from astropy.visualization.mpl_normalize import ImageNormalize
    from photutils.datasets import make_100gaussians_image
    from photutils import Background2D, MedianBackground
    from photutils import detect_threshold, detect_sources, deblend_sources
    from photutils import source_properties
    from photutils import EllipticalAperture
    data = make_100gaussians_image()
    bkg_estimator = MedianBackground()
    bkg = Background2D(data, (50, 50), filter_size=(3, 3),
                       bkg_estimator=bkg_estimator)
    threshold = bkg.background + (2. * bkg.background_rms)
    sigma = 3.0 * gaussian_fwhm_to_sigma  # FWHM = 3.
    kernel = Gaussian2DKernel(sigma, x_size=3, y_size=3)
    kernel.normalize()
    npixels = 5
    segm = detect_sources(data, threshold, npixels=npixels,
                          filter_kernel=kernel)
    segm_deblend = deblend_sources(data, segm, npixels=npixels,
                                   filter_kernel=kernel, nlevels=32,
                                   contrast=0.001)
    cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend)
    r = 3.  # approximate isophotal extent
    apertures = []
    for obj in cat:
        position = np.transpose((obj.xcentroid.value, obj.ycentroid.value))
        a = obj.semimajor_axis_sigma.value * r
        b = obj.semiminor_axis_sigma.value * r
        theta = obj.orientation.to(u.rad).value
        apertures.append(EllipticalAperture(position, a, b, theta=theta))
    norm = ImageNormalize(stretch=SqrtStretch())
    fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(10, 12.5))
    ax1.imshow(data, origin='lower', cmap='Greys_r', norm=norm)
    ax1.set_title('Data')
    cmap = segm_deblend.make_cmap(random_state=12345)
    ax2.imshow(segm_deblend, origin='lower', cmap=cmap)
    ax2.set_title('Segmentation Image')
    for aperture in apertures:
        aperture.plot(axes=ax1, color='white', lw=1.5)
        aperture.plot(axes=ax2, color='white', lw=1.5)
    plt.tight_layout()

We can also specify a specific subset of sources, defined by their
label numbers in the segmentation image:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> labels = [1, 5, 20, 50, 75, 80]
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend, labels=labels)
    >>> tbl2 = cat.to_table()
    >>> tbl2['xcentroid'].info.format = '.2f'  # optional format
    >>> tbl2['ycentroid'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl2['cxx'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl2['cxy'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl2['cyy'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> tbl2['gini'].info.format = '.2f'
    >>> print(tbl2)
     id xcentroid ycentroid sky_centroid ...   cxx      cxy      cyy    gini
           pix       pix                 ... 1 / pix2 1 / pix2 1 / pix2
    --- --------- --------- ------------ ... -------- -------- -------- ----
      1    235.22      1.25         None ...     0.17    -0.20     0.99 0.18
      5    258.37     11.77         None ...     0.37     0.15     0.16 0.13
     20    347.00     66.94         None ...     0.15    -0.01     0.21 0.11
     50    145.06    168.55         None ...     0.66     0.05     0.71 0.45
     75    301.86    239.25         None ...     0.47    -0.05     0.28 0.08
     80     43.20    250.01         None ...     0.18    -0.08     0.34 0.11

By default, the :meth:`~photutils.SourceCatalog.to_table` method will
include most scalar-valued properties from
:class:`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties`, but a subset of
properties can also be specified (or excluded) in the
`~astropy.table.QTable` via the ``columns`` or ``exclude_columns``
keywords:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> labels = [1, 5, 20, 50, 75, 80]
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend, labels=labels)
    >>> columns = ['id', 'xcentroid', 'ycentroid', 'source_sum', 'area']
    >>> tbl3 = cat.to_table(columns=columns)
    >>> tbl3['xcentroid'].info.format = '.4f'  # optional format
    >>> tbl3['ycentroid'].info.format = '.4f'
    >>> tbl3['source_sum'].info.format = '.4f'
    >>> print(tbl3)
     id xcentroid ycentroid source_sum area
           pix       pix               pix2
    --- --------- --------- ---------- ----
      1  235.2160    1.2457   594.2193 36.0
      5  258.3710   11.7694   684.7155 58.0
     20  346.9998   66.9428   864.9778 73.0
     50  145.0591  168.5496   885.9582 33.0
     75  301.8641  239.2534   391.1656 36.0
     80   43.2023  250.0100   627.6727 55.0

A `~astropy.wcs.WCS` transformation can also be input to
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` via the ``wcs``
keyword, in which case the sky coordinates at the source centroids
will be returned.


Background Properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Like with :func:`~photutils.aperture_photometry`, the ``data`` array
that is input to :func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties`
should be background subtracted.  If you input the background image
that was subtracted from the data into the ``background`` keyword of
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties`, the background
properties for each source will also be calculated:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> labels = [1, 5, 20, 50, 75, 80]
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend, labels=labels,
    ...                         background=bkg.background)
    >>> columns = ['id', 'background_at_centroid', 'background_mean',
    ...            'background_sum']
    >>> tbl4 = cat.to_table(columns=columns)
    >>> tbl4['background_at_centroid'].info.format = '{:.10f}'  # optional format
    >>> tbl4['background_mean'].info.format = '{:.10f}'
    >>> tbl4['background_sum'].info.format = '{:.10f}'
    >>> print(tbl4)
     id background_at_centroid background_mean background_sum
    --- ---------------------- --------------- --------------
      1           5.2020428266    5.2021662094 187.2779835383
      5           5.2140031370    5.2139893924 302.4113847608
     20           5.2787968578    5.2785772173 385.3361368595
     50           5.1896511123    5.1895516008 171.2552028270
     75           5.1409531509    5.1408425626 185.0703322539
     80           5.2109780136    5.2108402505 286.5962137759

Photometric Errors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` requires inputting a
*total* error array, i.e. the background-only error plus Poisson noise
due to individual sources.  The
:func:`~photutils.utils.calc_total_error` function can be used to
calculate the total error array from a background-only error array and
an effective gain.

The ``effective_gain``, which is the ratio of counts (electrons or
photons) to the units of the data, is used to include the Poisson
noise from the sources.  ``effective_gain`` can either be a scalar
value or a 2D image with the same shape as the ``data``.  A 2D
effective gain image is useful for mosaic images that have variable
depths (i.e., exposure times) across the field. For example, one
should use an exposure-time map as the ``effective_gain`` for a
variable depth mosaic image in count-rate units.

Let's assume our synthetic data is in units of electrons per second.
In that case, the ``effective_gain`` should be the exposure time (here
we set it to 500 seconds).  Here we use
:func:`~photutils.utils.calc_total_error` to calculate the total error
and input it into the
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` function.  When a
total ``error`` is input, the
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.source_sum_err` property is
calculated.  `~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.source_sum` and
`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties.source_sum_err` are the
instrumental flux and propagated flux error within the source
segments:

.. doctest-requires:: scipy, skimage

    >>> from photutils.utils import calc_total_error
    >>> labels = [1, 5, 20, 50, 75, 80]
    >>> effective_gain = 500.
    >>> error = calc_total_error(data, bkg.background_rms, effective_gain)
    >>> cat = source_properties(data, segm_deblend, labels=labels, error=error)
    >>> columns = ['id', 'xcentroid', 'ycentroid', 'source_sum',
    ...            'source_sum_err']
    >>> tbl5 = cat.to_table(columns=columns)
    >>> tbl5['xcentroid'].info.format = '{:.4f}'  # optional format
    >>> tbl5['ycentroid'].info.format = '{:.4f}'
    >>> for col in tbl5.colnames:
    ...     tbl5[col].info.format = '%.8g'  # for consistent table output
    >>> print(tbl5)
     id xcentroid ycentroid source_sum source_sum_err
           pix       pix
    --- --------- --------- ---------- --------------
      1 235.21604 1.2457344  594.21933      12.787658
      5 258.37099 11.769376  684.71547      16.326605
     20 346.99975 66.942777  864.97776      18.677809
     50 145.05911 168.54961   885.9582      11.908449
     75 301.86414 239.25337  391.16559      12.080326
     80 43.202278 250.00997  627.67268      15.812197


Pixel Masking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Pixels can be completely ignored/excluded (e.g. bad pixels) when
measuring the source properties by providing a boolean mask image via
the ``mask`` keyword (`True` pixel values are masked) to the
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` function or
:class:`~photutils.segmentation.SourceProperties` class.


Filtering
^^^^^^^^^

`SExtractor`_'s centroid and morphological parameters are always
calculated from a filtered "detection" image.  The usual downside of
the filtering is the sources will be made more circular than they
actually are (assuming a circular kernel is used, which is common).
If you wish to reproduce `SExtractor`_ results, then use the
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.source_properties` ``filter_kernel``
keyword to filter the ``data`` prior to centroid and morphological
measurements.   The kernel should be the same one used with
:func:`~photutils.segmentation.detect_sources` to define the
segmentation image.  If ``filter_kernel`` is `None`, then the centroid
and morphological measurements will be performed on the unfiltered
``data``.  Note that photometry is *always* performed on the
unfiltered ``data``.


Reference/API
-------------

.. automodapi:: photutils.segmentation
    :no-heading:


.. _SExtractor:  http://www.astromatic.net/software/sextractor
